AT&T 2018 JOBS REPORT
Telecom Giant Hollows Out Middle Class
Workforce and Outsources to Global
Contractors, Even as it Reaps Tax Windfall
COMMUNICATIONS WORKERS OF AMERICA Updated April 25, 2018
1 INTRODUCTION
1 AT&T REAPED BILLIONS DUE TO THE RECENT TAX CUTS AND HAS ROBUST PROFITS
2 YET AT&T CONTINUES TO LAY OFF THOUSANDS OF LONG TIME EMPLOYEES,
ELIMINATE CALL CENTER JOBS AND MOVE WORK OFFSHORE
3 CASE STUDY: WORKERS STILL FIGHTING DETROIT CALL CENTER CLOSURE
3 CASE STUDY: STRUGGLING TO GET BY AFTER CALL CENTER CLOSURE IN COLUMBUS
3 MIDWEST CALL CENTER WORKERS FIGHT TO PRESERVE REMAINING JOBS
4 AT&T RELIES ON A GLOBAL WEB OF LOW-WAGE CALL CENTER CONTRACTORS
5 AT&T CUTS TECHNICIAN WORKFORCE, RELIES ON CONTRACTORS FOR INSTALLATION AND CONSTRUCTION
5 AT&T HAS THE CHOICE TO INVEST IN ITS WORKFORCE. IT HAS DONE SO BEFORE,
AND SO HAVE ITS COMPETITORS.
6 WHAT’S NEXT FOR AT&T?
The Communications Workers of America represents 700,000 workers across the United States, including
more than 100,000 at AT&T.
For more information on efforts to protect good jobs at AT&T, visit www.GoodJobsATT.org.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1
INTRODUCTION
Iconic U.S. telecom giant AT&T received
an unprecedented windfall from the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, which President
Trump signed into law in December 2017.
But despite this massive boost to its profits,
the company is choosing to undercut and
offshore American jobs.
AT&T lobbied aggressively in favor of the tax
cuts, and CEO Randall Stephenson went on
the record with promises to create thousands
of jobs should the bill pass:
“By immediately lowering the corporate
tax rate to 20%, this bill will stimulate
investment, job creation and economic
growth in the United States… If the House
bill is signed into law, we’d commit to
increasing our domestic investment by $1
billion in the first year in which the new
rates are in place. And research tells us
that every $1 billion in capital invested in
telecom creates about 7,000 good jobs for
the middle class.”1
“From my standpoint, the driver of this is the
business tax reform… if we get investment
going, we get productivity going, we get
wage gain going, we invest another billion
dollars. Every billion dollars AT&T invests is
7,000 hard hat jobs. These are not entrylevel jobs. These are 7,000 jobs of people
putting fiber in the ground, hard hat jobs
that make $70,000 to $80,000 per year.”2
AT&T has also said it wants to retrain half its
250,000-person workforce for the twenty-first
century.3
In stark contradiction to these grand
statements, AT&T continues to eliminate
thousands of good, family-supporting jobs
from coast to coast, and has cut more than
16,000 call center jobs in the past seven years
alone. Instead of investing in its workforce
and transitioning to jobs of the future, AT&T
is laying off American workers and relying
increasingly on a global web of low-wage
contractors to provide customer service and
network maintenance.
If AT&T wants to maintain its credibility
as a responsible corporation, it must stop
destroying good jobs and betraying workers
who have dedicated decades of their lives to
an employer they believed in.
AT&T reaped billions due to the
recent tax cuts and has robust
profits
AT&T saw profits of $29.5 billion in 2017,
compared to $13 billion the previous year.
This massive increase reflects a $20 billion
boost from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in the
form of a reduction of future tax liabilities on
AT&T’s balance sheet.4
Thanks to the tax cuts, the company also
expects a $3 billion annual increase in
cash profits starting in 2018.5 Despite
these supercharged profits, the company
announced plans to spend just $1 billion
more on capital projects and pay a bonus
of merely $1,000 to its employees, which
amounts to a one-time $200 million
expenditure, or 7% of AT&T’s expected
annual benefit from the tax cuts.6
AT&T’s business is extremely profitable, with
strong growth in its DIRECTV NOW streaming
service and international business offsetting
a gradual decline in legacy landline, and
aggressive investment in fiber promising a
strong future for fixed broadband service.
While the wireless industry remains
competitive, CFO John Stephens recently said
that wireless profits are stabilizing, and AT&T
reported its lowest ever customer churn in
the fourth quarter of 2017.7 All in all, AT&T
is a highly profitable company – known as
a dividend aristocrat on Wall Street – with a
promising future ahead and ample financial
ability to invest in its workforce.
2
Yet AT&T continues to lay
off thousands of long time
employees, eliminate call center
jobs and move work offshore
Despite its strong financial position and
promises to invest in its American workforce,
AT&T has shifted much of its employment
away from good, family-supporting jobs and
towards a low-wage model that undermines
the quality of its customer service and its
standing as a good corporate citizen.
Since 2011, the company has closed 44 call
centers and laid off thousands of workers,
resulting in the destruction of 16,000 call
center jobs nationwide. The workers at these
call centers often had decades of service with
AT&T and they and their communities feel
betrayed when the company callously cuts
their jobs and devastates their communities,
especially while benefiting from billions of
dollars in tax cuts.
In four Midwestern states – Ohio, Michigan,
Wisconsin and Illinois – the company has laid
off 2,300 workers in just the past three years.
Much of the customer service work has been
taken over by low-wage contract workers
who lack adequate training, many of whom
operate overseas.
In Michigan and Ohio – two states devastated
by deindustrialization – AT&T closed four
call centers in the past two years. In 2011,
over 1,000 people worked at these centers,
which were located in Detroit, Port Huron
(MI), Columbus and Cleveland and provided
stable, family-supporting jobs. AT&T chose to
shutter these locations and lay off hundreds
of long-term employees, leaving them to start
from scratch after dedicating their careers to
AT&T.
canada
columbia
costa rica
dominican republic
el salvador
india
jamaica
philippines
vendor name
Advanced Call Center
Technologies
Alorica
Concentrix
Convergys
IBEX Global
Startek
Sutherland
Sykes
Teleperformance
VXI
TABLE 1







 













3
Case Study: Workers Still Fighting
Detroit Call Center Closure
Workers at an AT&T call center in Detroit
were notified ten days before Christmas 2017
that their center was going to close, and they
would lose their jobs.
Sheila Lewis, a two-decade employee at the
center, loved her job – it paid well and she
was very good at it. Just weeks after the
closure announcement, Sheila was feted
at a banquet where she won an award for
being the number one representative in
the collections department for recovering
more than $2 million for AT&T in 2017. Now
she must borrow from her 401(k) for living
expenses and is concerned about whether
she can maintain health benefits.
Sheila said about her layoff, “I put in 20 years,
and then AT&T laid me off along with 116 of
my coworkers. The way they did it isn’t fair
or respectful. It’s also bad business – the
contractors doing our work cost the company
money because of their poor service and
harm to the AT&T brand.”
While AT&T blamed reduced customer call
volume for the closure of three collections
centers in Detroit, Kansas City and Dallas in
December 2017, the company can decide
where to route calls and continues to
contract with global third-party call centers to
handle collections cases.
Sheila and her union are currently fighting
to reverse the layoffs and assert the rights of
long-term employees through the National
Labor Relations Board and other channels.
Case Study: Struggling to Get By After
Call Center Closure in Columbus
In December 2016, AT&T closed a Columbus,
Ohio call center that it had whittled down to
70 employees from a previous 400, as the
company relied more and more on low-wage
contractors.
Former customer service representative
Linda Bradley had worked at the call center
for 19 years before she was laid off in the
closure. Linda relied on the AT&T benefits
package that provided high quality health
care for her family of six, and valued
her strong bonds with fellow long-time
coworkers.
Since the shuttering of the Columbus center,
finances have been tight. The job market
for customer service work does not offer
anywhere near the middle-class salary she
had in her union AT&T position, and she has
the hard task of trying to adjust her family’s
lifestyle.
Linda wants AT&T executives to know, “We’re
your frontline employees. We deal with
customers who are bringing in the money.
You should take us into consideration when
you’re making big corporate decisions and
lining your pockets. We’re everyday people
and we’re living our lives too. But you don’t
take us into account, you don’t think about
the employees who make the company
work.”
Midwest Call Center Workers
Fight to Preserve Remaining Jobs
At the remaining call
centers in the Midwest,
workers are fighting to
save the approximately
1,100 good jobs that
remain. A call center in
Dayton, Ohio absorbed
some of the workers
impacted by the closures
in Columbus and Cleveland, but further
layoffs have shrunk that center to 66 workers
down from 150 in the early 2000s. Tomeka
Cooley-Pettus, a 13-year employee in Dayton,
called out AT&T’s decision to trumpet the
$1,000 bonus tied to tax reform, and one
week later announce a new round of layoffs
at her call center. She says, “The company
got rewarded with tax breaks, and real
people got hurt. Communities like Dayton
4
are struggling because of these job losses.
Community stores are shutting down. A lot of
people are leaving to find work somewhere
they can make a living. Thanks to companies
like AT&T, it’s a race to the bottom instead of
a race to the top.”
In Appleton, Wisconsin, only about thirty
workers remain in a center that had 400
just three years ago and they are concerned
about additional layoffs and cuts. AT&T
worker and union member Betsy LaFontaine,
who has worked at the Appleton center for
almost 30 years, explains:
“AT&T has shifted our customer calls to
offshore vendor centers where it pays
workers less than $5 an hour, and at the
same time the company has made our
sales metrics tougher and more exacting
to meet. As a result, many dedicated coworkers have been ‘performance-managed’
out of their jobs. AT&T is highly profitable,
but even after recent tax benefits, it’s still
holding workers like me by the throat with
the imminent threat of job loss.”
The dire situation for AT&T call center
workers in the Midwest is mirrored in much
of the country. In the Southwest region,
AT&T has reduced its call center workforce
by half since 2012 and in the Southeast,
it has closed 13 call centers and laid off
hundreds of workers in recent years. Zoom
out to a picture that includes attrition and
buyouts, and the Southeast has 1,600 fewer
call center jobs today than it did just four
years ago. The company has also closed
five call centers in California and cut the
workforce by forty percent. Altogether,
AT&T has closed 44 call centers and
eliminated more than 16,000 call center
jobs since 2011, including thousands in its
wireless division. Meanwhile, its offshored
workforce continues to grow apace.
AT&T Relies on a Global Web
of Low-Wage Call Center
Contractors
AT&T employs a global web of more
than 30 third-party call centers to handle
customer service, sales and tech support,
enabling the telecom giant to offshore
work to low-wage countries with weak
labor protections and inadequate legal
enforcement mechanisms. In a 2017 report,
CWA documented the conditions at these
international outsourcing giants that pay
workers a small fraction of the wages
earned at union call centers in the United
States.
AT&T has also opened its own call center in
Mexico, which currently employs over 1,000
people, and is expected to expand to 5,000
employees – drawing customer calls away
from U.S. based centers. Recent reports
indicate that workers in Mexico are being
trained to do the same work as employees
in the United States, including support for
small businesses and bilingual customer
service.
AT&T Call Center Closings Since 2011
5
AT&T Cuts Technician Workforce,
Relies on Contractors for
Installation and Construction
AT&T is also slashing the jobs of technicians
who build the physical network and install
equipment in customers’ homes. In the
Midwest, AT&T has eliminated 1,330
technician jobs in the past three years,
even as it contracts out all of its network
construction, much of its engineering
work, and the vast majority of its satellite
installation work. The installation of satellite
equipment in customer homes is carried out
by contractors like Mastec, DirectSat and
Goodman Networks, where workers report
stressful conditions and job instability.8
In the Southwest region, AT&T announced a
mass layoff of 713 workers in December of
2017, including 152 technicians who install
equipment in customers’ homes. AT&T laid
off these technicians even while it uses
contractors to perform 85 percent of satellite
installations. This corporate decision to use
contractors instead of AT&T employees who
are trained to do the same work violates
collective bargaining agreements that commit
the company to assign this work to direct
employees who are well-trained and provide
a consistent level of quality service.
AT&T has the choice to invest
in its workforce. It has done
so before, and so have its
competitors.
AT&T can look to precedents for on-shoring
call center work and bringing network
maintenance in-house, rather than relying
on contractors to do this critical work. In
fact, AT&T itself has recently negotiated
agreements with the Communications
Workers of America (CWA) to bring back
call center work from offshore locations:
it recently opened a wireless call center in
Houston that will handle calls that previously
went overseas and the company signed
agreements that union-represented call
centers will receive a minimum percentage of
all wireless customer service calls. However,
this incremental progress is not enough
when AT&T is simultaneously laying off
thousands of its long-term employees.
Competitor telecom companies have
negotiated more comprehensive agreements
with CWA that ensure a stable, well-trained
workforce to handle customer service and
network maintenance. At Verizon landline,
the company guarantees that more than twothirds of customer service calls are handled
by in-house employees and in 2016 the
company brought back 1,300 call center jobs
in the Northeastern and Mid-Atlantic United
States.9
At Frontier Communications, a large
portion of the workforce has job security
guarantees stemming from agreements
with CWA at the time that Frontier acquired
various assets. Frontier also committed
to job security for all its 1400 employees
in West Virginia after an 18-day strike in
March of this year.10
6
AT&T has a history of constructive labor
relations, to which it could return. When
the company entered the DSL market and
pursued more aggressive fiber deployment,
it agreed with CWA that much of this
work should be done by in-house, union
technicians. Unfortunately, AT&T has
changed its approach and now seeks to
minimize its workforce as a cost saving
measure. But this strategy has serious risks
for America’s largest telecom provider.
WHAT’S NEXT FOR AT&T?
AT&T must examine its values and strategy as the telecom industry
evolves. In order to compete effectively with cable and other wireless
carriers to retain and win customers, AT&T needs an experienced, welltrained workforce. CFO John Stephens recently affirmed that “customer
satisfaction is the number one driver of lower churn.”11
Instead of eliminating long-term employees to save costs, AT&T should
follow through on its promises to create and preserve good jobs. This
includes retraining experienced workers as its business evolves. AT&T
has received positive attention for its training programs that transitions
engineers and IT employees into new roles, but this initiative largely
excludes the front-line workforce that serves customers and maintains the
integrity of the network every day.12
Communities across the country that have traditionally viewed AT&T as a
good employer and an upstanding corporate citizen are losing their trust
in this storied company. The question is, will AT&T work to regain the
confidence of these communities and customers before its reputation has
sustained irreparable damage?
7
COMMUNICATIONS WORKERS OF AMERICA
501 3RD STREET NW WASHINGTON, DC 20001
CWA-UNION.ORG
ENDNOTES
1. AT&T Inc., Press Release, “AT&T to Invest an Additional $1 Billion in the
United States if Competitive Tax Rate Enacted,” November 8, 2017.
Available at: http://about.att.com/story/att_to_invest_an_additional_1_
billion_in_the_united_states_if_competitive_tax_rate_enacted.html
2. Yahoo Finance, “AT&T CEO says they’ll invest ‘at least’ $1 billion and
create 7,000 jobs if tax reform passes,” November 29, 2017. Available
at: https://finance.yahoo.com/news/atandt-ceo-says-theyll-invest-least1-billion-create-7000-jobs-tax-reform-passes-200245187.html
3. CNBC, “AT&T’s $1 billion gambit: Retraining nearly half its workforce
for jobs of the future,” March 13, 2018. Available at: https://www.cnbc.
com/2018/03/13/atts-1-billion-gambit-retraining-nearly-half-itsworkforce.html
4. AT&T Inc., Press Release, “AT&T Reports Fourth-Quarter and Full-Year
Results,” January 31, 2018. Available at: http://about.att.com/story/
att_fourth_quarter_earnings_2017.html
5. AT&T Inc., 2017 Fourth Quarter Earnings Call Transcript, available
at: https://seekingalpha.com/article/4141971-ts-t-ceo-randallstephenson-q4-2017-results-earnings-call-transcript?part=single
6. AT&T Inc., Press Release, “AT&T Reports Fourth-Quarter and Full-Year
Results,” January 31, 2018. Available at: http://about.att.com/story/
att_fourth_quarter_earnings_2017.html
7. Ibid., and transcript of John Stephens presentation at Morgan Stanley
European Technology, Media and Telecom Conference, November 16,
2017. Available at:
https://seekingalpha.com/pr/17005528-t-chief-financial-officerdiscusses-company-trends-strategy-morgan-stanley-conference
8. See employee reviews for DirectSat -- https://www.indeed.com/cmp