AT&T's quarterly results give hints on urgency behind Time Warner deal
The company's wireless services revenue declined 0.7 percent to $18.2 billion due to decreases in services and equipment revenues. That included the loss of 268,000 lucrative postpaid phone subscribers.
FILE - OCTOBER 22, 2016: It was reported that AT&T has reached a deal to acquire Time Warner...
FILE - OCTOBER 22, 2016: It was reported that AT&T has reached a deal to acquire Time Warner for more than $80 billion October 22, 2016. 380909 04: The AT&T logo is seen on the safety helmet of advance-line technician Fred Murray October 26, 2000 in Des Plaines, Illinois. On October 25, 2000, AT&T Corp. announced that it was breaking itself up into four smaller companies for the third time since 1984, scrapping its vision of one-stop shopping for communications services, and dismantling a telephone and cable TV empire that took three years and more than $100 billion to build. The widely expected breakup will create four distinct entities, including an independent cable company and an independent wireless company, all operating under the AT&T brand name. (Photo by Tim Boyle/Newsmakers)
By Conor Shine

4:59 PM on Oct 23, 2016 CDT


As it was announcing its $108.7 billion acquisition of Time Warner Inc. Saturday night, AT&T released its third-quarter earnings report several days early and in the process provided a clearer view of the challenges facing the telecom market that prompted the deal.


Close

The earnings report paints a picture of an AT&T stuck in neutral, with growth in the company's video and internet offerings offset by declines in its wireless and legacy services in an increasingly saturated market.

The Dallas-based company's revenue is still substantial at $40.9 billion for the quarter, a 4.4 percent increase from a year ago. But when excluding gains from the company's July 2015 acquisition of DirecTV, revenue was essentially flat, AT&T said.

The company's wireless services revenue declined 0.7 percent to $18.2 billion due to decreases in services and equipment revenues. That included the loss of 268,000 lucrative postpaid phone subscribers, although the company added a net of 212,000 new postpaid subscribers when tablets and other devices were factored in.

On the pay-TV side, revenue was up 17.1 percent to $12.7 billion largely due to the DirecTV acquisition. But AT&T lost a net of 3,000 pay-TV subscribers, with 323,000 new DirecTV subscribers and a loss of 326,000 U-verse subscribers, with many of those U-verse customers making the switch to satellite.

How Texans are now buying Powerball and Mega Millions tickets
SPONSORED CONTENT
How Texans are now buying Powerball and Mega Millions tickets
BY The Lotter
With increasing competition in a rapidly converging telecom and media industry, AT&T found itself few options to substantially build on its dominant positions as the largest pay-TV provider and second-largest wireless provider.

But as it's done throughout its history, AT&T showed it wasn't afraid to make a bold acquisition to chart a new course toward growth.

The earnings release came three days early, following the announcement that AT&T would acquire Time Warner in a cash-and-stock deal, instantly transforming itself into an entertainment powerhouse.

On Saturday shortly after the merger was announced, AT&T's CEO Randall Stephenson spoke of changing the "fundamental nature" of the company's business model, adding new advertising and content creation potential on top of its subscription-based revenue.

With tech players like Google, Apple, Amazon and Netflix as well as traditional rivals Verizon and Comcast all positioning themselves for a world that's increasingly video- and mobile-centric, AT&T's acquisition of Time Warner is an aggressive move that will put the company at the center of that emerging future.

AT&T's goal, Stephenson said, is to build a "totally differentiated video service" that can reach customers through traditional television, on mobile and through over-the-top streaming services, he said.

The company plans to enter the streaming arena later this year with the launch of DirecTV Now.

Time Warner provides a ready-made trove of assets — including HBO, CNN, TNT, TBS and Warner Brothers Studio — to help AT&T populate its new video services with premium content.

Eventually, the company plans to leverage the scale of its combined content creation and distribution offerings to power new types of targeted advertising.

Overall, AT&T booked $3.3 billion in profit in the third quarter, an 11 percent increase from the prior year. Its earnings per share increased 8 percent to 54 cents. Company executives will discuss the third quarter results in a 7:30 a.m. call on Monday.


